>> Richard Feldman: That segues
us into inferring functions,
where we have a lot more interesting
moving pieces to deal with.
So here we have our increment
function from earlier.
So, we got x's, that's one argument.
We're returning x +1.
Again, we're just gonna go through and
like very quickly assign some things here.
So, we're gonna have 0 for
the name of the increment.
I'm just gonna use one to be
the entire function body.
It's kind of a squiggly line there,
but basically this is, like, it's not,
we're not talking about the argument,
we're not talking about the return type.
We're talking about the function,
like the entire lambda.
And, in JavaScript, of course,
as in the other languages,
you can pass an entire function,
like as an argument to something.
You can put it in an array, and, of
course, you can assign it to a constant.
So that's what that type
is referring to that.
That one, two, we're going to give two,
the argument of that function.
Three is gonna be the return
type of the function.
So those are all distinct pieces that all
have different type checking going on
with them.
And then we have four being the actual
expression here of like x + 1.
And then within that we have two is
what we're going to assign here.
Here we are doing the cut
to the chase thing, right?
Where we're saying, like, okay,
I see it's a two in scope.
So, like, don't bother some linking.
Just like, that's a two.
We know it's a two, like, it resolves
directly to that, and then one is
gonna be its own type, which is just
gonna end up being unified to a number.
Okay, so everything's null.
Yeah, question, right?
>> Speaker 2: Why are you able to just so,
in like, the past example,
you had a const, and then you reference
that same variable down there.
Why did you have a different ID
in the database in that case?
But here you're able to,
>> Richard Feldman: Gotcha, just because I
was doing the like, demonstrating
that this is sort of like the.
This whole thing is following the like
maximum, like use variables for
everything thing.
You don't like, you don't need to do that.
You definitely can just like cut
to the chase and be like, yeah.
Like we know that x is 2.
So, like, we don't need to
like make a new variable and
simply get to say that
they're the same like that.
The point in both cases is that like,
if you have knowledge for
sure that these two things are going
to be identical, you have a choice.
Like, either you can, like,
assign the thing and then, like,
immediately turn around and
link them together.
Or you can just say like no, these are
gonna be identical because the whole point
of like the sim linking is that it's
supposed to mean that these two are so
connected that it doesn't matter
which one of them gets changed.
And it's gonna affect
the other one anyway, so
either way should work equally well,
right?
So, we've got all our variables in place,
and
now we're gonna start going through and
inferring things.
Now, keep in mind that at this
point we have no call sites,
nobody is calling this function.
All we're trying to do right now is we're
trying to use the information that we have
about this function, namely that it
returns x +1, to learn things about what
are the different pieces
that go into this function?
Like, what can we say about that function
just using the information within
the function itself?
And then in the next section,
we're gonna get into callers 'cause they
can also influence the function types.
So here we have unify(0, 1).
So this is basically our classic,
like unify this with this.
As previously noted,
you could shortcut that if you want to.
We're gonna really keep that consistent
with how we've been doing it.
I'm keeping a little running tab
over here, of what is the reason for
these unifications?
Because we're gonna end up with
a quite a little stack of them here.
Next one is gonna be we're
gonna unify four with number.
So, the reason to do that is that
basically, whenever you have plus,
much like when you have
multiplication in this language.
We're choosing to say that
it always returns a number.
Obviously, there are plenty of languages
where it could be a number or string, or
something like that.
But probably this is like, yeah,
any time you see a plus just like
any time you see a multiplication,
that means we immediately know that thing
is a number, no further analysis needed.
Next, we unify 2 with number.
So 2 is x over here and that's once again,
gonna be for exactly the same rule,
except applied to the operands.
So this is saying, just like with
multiplication, if you're on either side
of the plus, you must be a number,
which leads us directly to 5.
There's actually multiple reasons
that 5 needs to be a number.
One is it's a number literal.
And even if it weren't a number literal,
the plus would cause us to do
the same unification here.
So basically, like we're doing two
unifications, two unifies here, and
both of them are exactly the same thing.
They're gonna have the same result.
It's always harmless to redo
the same unification multiple times.
It's like a waste of performance.
But point being that one of them is
because of plus, and plus says, hey,
unify both operators was number, and the
other one is because of number literal.
I don't know of any precedent for
trying to be fancy and, like,
elide something like this and try to say,
like, hey, this is a waste of time.
Don't do it.
There might be a way to do that.
I'm not sure.
It probably wouldn't apply in all
scenarios, but there's probably some way
you could be a little bit strategic about
like, hey, I'm about to go unify this.
Let me go see if that's a number literal,
because, if so, we already did, like,
when you're still at the parse node level.
But yeah, I said,
I'm not aware of people like trying to
get that fancy with unification yeah.
>> Speaker 3: The algorithm is
called worst case optimal join.
You can run that.
>> Richard Feldman: Worst-case
optimal join okay?
>> Speaker 3: Yeah.
>> Richard Feldman: I guess
there was a way to do it.
Cool, good to know.
Okay, and then finally we have a unifying
4 and 3 and that's because of the return.
So, what 4 and
3 are basically saying is like, okay.
So this is the entire expression that's
being given to this return statement, and
then 3 is the actual return
type of the function.
Now, the reason it's important to connect
these is that return is statement that can
appear multiple times in the function.
So, similarly to the ternary that we
just learned about where we had the two
different branches and the only
rule was they have to be connected.
That's exactly the same relationship
that we have between return and
the function's return type, except instead
of it being two branches, it's one or
more [LAUGH] branches or
one or more returns.
So we could have a bunch of
conditionals up in here, and
each of them is doing its own
early return, for example.
And if we had that, every single one of
those return statements would need to get
unified with this return value, which
in turn means they all need to agree.
So in other words,
if I have five different return
statements in this function,
they all better be numbers or whatever.
But one of them are numbers, and one of
them is a string, then we got a problem.
That's gonna be a type mismatch.
Doing this unification one time for every
single return we encounter is the way that
we both do that, while also inferring what
is the actual return type of the function.
Was there a question?
>> Speaker 2: You might go through this,
but I'm struggling to understand,
when you unify 4 and number, how you're
inferring that number type without direct.
I would think you'd have to go to
the + is where that comes from.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah, so basically,
the rule for + is the same as the rule
that we, for this language,
we're choosing to have the rule for
+ be the same as the rule that we chose to
multiply, which is basically just that.
+ means, whenever we see +,
we're always gonna unify this with number.
And we're always gonna unify
this with whatever's there,
because we're saying plus takes two
numbers, and so I have no idea.
Without even looking at this, I'm like,
whatever this thing's type ID is,
it's getting unified with number.
Whatever this thing's type ID is,
it's getting unified with a number.
And also, whatever my entire return or
return value is the wrong term, like,
whatever I evaluate to that four is
also getting unified with numbers.
So, x is getting it,
because it's one of the operands,
one is getting it because it's
one of the other operands, and
then separately it's getting it again,
because it's a number literal.
And then the entire thing that is to say,
the four is getting it,
because that's what the plus returns,
so to speak.
Does that make sense?
>> Speaker 2: Yeah.
>> Richard Feldman: Okay.
>> Speaker 3: In another
way of saying this,
we set some rules that the plus
operator has a fixed definition.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah, so
that's the language design thing, right?
Every language has some set of
hard-coded rules that in some languages,
have more than others, but the hard-coded
rule that we have decided to use for
this language,
that this is how plus works.
We could make it have totally
different semantics, but
these are pretty reasonable semantics,
and also, give you a good intuition for
what's going on here without having
gotten into function calling.
Which is an even fancier version
of what we're doing here.
All right, so
just going through the actual unification.
So, this one basically says,
all right, simply get to 1.
Next one is a unify 4 with number.
So 4 was null, now it's number.
Same thing with 2, now it's number.
5, again, was number.
These two, it's like it already is number,
so we're fine, we'll leave that alone.
That one's basically a no-op or
wasted work.
And then finally, unify 4 with 3, and so
that basically results in 3 being symlinks
to four, which means it yet
again is going to end up being a number.
Now, we may notice that we finished
all of our unifications, and
at this point we still
have somebody being null.
Now, as previously noted,
in future examples,
we will actually have functions that
like where that stays null for real.
But in this case, we actually do have
some, sorry, that's the wrong one.
I was referring to one, right?
So one is the type of the entire function.
So, the type of the entire function,
yeah, let's talk about that.
Basically, what we have here is
we have a concrete type that has
more information than what we've
seen in a concrete type before.
So previously our concrete types
are just like, I am a concrete string.
The end, goodbye or I'm a concrete number.
The end, goodbye.
Here we have, I am a concrete function,
and I have more information.
Now this more information
is very important for
our type checker implementation, because
we have to take this stuff into account.
For example, when we were saying
if I'm unifying this string and
this number, all I need to look at,
if this field is different,
it's a type mismatch, game over.
That's still true here.
If you look at this field, and you're
this is a function and that's a string,
type mismatch.
This is a function,
that's a number, type mismatch.
But if they're both function,
it's actually not sufficient
anymore to just conclude that they
automatically are unified and
everything, it's fine because
there's more information here.
So, if with strings and numbers, if it's
like they have the same concrete type,
we're in that branch of unify, where
we're like, yeah, we're done moving on.
But if it's specifically two functions,
there's more work to do,
because these functions could
have different argument types.
They could have different return types.
Basically, what we need to do
at this point is say, well,
before we can answer the question of like,
what's going on with these functions,
we essentially need to recursively unify.
We basically need to say like,
now that we've gotten to a point
in unify where we have two functions,
the next step is to go through and
unify all their arguments and
unify their return value.
And any one of those could produce
a tightness match absolutely.
But basically, the reason that we have to
do that is because otherwise we are just
completely disregarding these things.
They're sort of sneaking by.
That's how you get type unsoundness
is where you have types that
are participating in type unification.
But you're not actually constraining
them the way that they're supposed to
be constrained.
We've just like missed some constraints.
So this is one of several complications
that are going to end up being added on to
our unify function and that are gonna make
it ultimately more complicated than the,
well, it still took up
like an entire screen.
But the simpler version that we
talked about two sections ago,
back when we didn't have any
functions to think about.
So, the way that I'm gonna represent
this in the database is like this.
So, this is basically just like
a little rotation I made up for,
this is the argument.
The argument is a sim
link to 2 in this case.
And then the return value is
essentially a sim link to 3.
This is really just me trying to fit
something concise on the slide, but
in the actual compiler,
this is how we're gonna represent it.
We're gonna say you have
a concrete function.
Here are your ARGs, and
then here is what it returns.
And I said returns,
not because it's portable,
because return is a keyword in JavaScript,
so I can't call it return, but
you can also say ret,
like is short for return.
But I figured, if you're not used
to seeing ret all over the place,
like I have a compiler code bases,
returns is probably reasonable.
Okay, so actually, sorry,
before we move on to calling.
Any questions on defining functions, yeah?
>> Speaker 4: I guess I'm curious.
Like, when you represent the function
instead of the database, I mean,
obviously, you have args is to
like a concrete value, but like,
would you want that to be?
Like you said, like, number, right?
And then returns would
be also number as well.
Or would you just stuff the actual,
I guess,
like node in the database itself.
>> Richard Feldman: I didn't quite follow.
So which thing are we stuffing
in the database or not?
>> Speaker 4: The function definition,
if we have like.
>> Richard Feldman: Yes.
>> Speaker 4: So
maybe I'm misunderstanding it a bit.
Is like on the bottom left,
that object with concrete function?
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah.
>> Speaker 4: Is that the exact
value that would be stuffed?
>> Richard Feldman: Yes, yeah, right.
So,
in the same way that when we say
number in the table over here,
what we're actually meaning is
concrete colon quote number.
>> Speaker 4: Yeah.
>> Richard Feldman: It's the same
exact thing,
except that it's concrete function, and
then there's more information than
there is in the case of number.
>> Speaker 4: Gotcha, so
I guess what I'm wondering, and
sorry if maybe I misunderstood
you like confused.
It's like for like args we have two,
like the value two, but would that be?
>> Richard Feldman: That's like this.
>> Speaker 4: I see.
>> Richard Feldman: Type ID two yeah.
>> Speaker 4: I'm sorry, that makes sense.
That was like the value too.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah.
>> Speaker 4: Okay.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah,
so I like, I don't know.
Maybe I should have
represented differently here.
I just feel like I said.
>> Speaker 4: I think I have a citation.
>> Richard Feldman: But it's the type ID
and then usually the way we refer to.
It's whatever that type of years like
the sublink notation here, but yeah,
this is the source of truth.
This is what's actually
the compiler [LAUGH].
>> Speaker 4: I was evaluating it and you
put x as 2 and term value is actually 3
sub, that's why I think there's
a bit of confusion on my part.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah, so 2 is
the argument, 3 is our term value, yeah?
>> Speaker 4: Correct, but is you saying
that's a value in the database or
the key, the ID?
>> Richard Feldman: It's the ID, yeah.
>> Speaker 4: Yeah, I was actually
saying the actual return value.
>> Richard Feldman: I see.
>> Speaker 4: So
that was just my confusion.
>> Richard Feldman: Okay, got it.
>> Speaker 4: Yeah, exactly.
>> Richard Feldman: Okay, cool, yeah,
and it is worth noting that much like
the symlinks, these can change over time,
as other things affect them
outside the definition of the function,
such as function calls [LAUGH].
So let's talk about those.